1. Find a microbe, or microbial product shape file to 3D print.

Check out these resources for finding 3D shape files:
https://www.thingiverse.com/
https://3dprint.nih.gov/discover
https://www.shapeways.com/
https://www.yeggi.com/
https://cults3d.com/en

Some of these groups will print for you, others will provide shape files for free for printing on your own machines.

Try searching terms like "bacteria," "fungi," or "yeast."
Alternativley, try browsing through the files and see if any of the proteins or compounds are derived from microbes.
Try searching terms like "acetic acid," "ethanol," "antibiotics," 
Not sure what proteins and compounds might be relevant? Skip to Step 2 and work backwards. 

As an alternative to 3D printing, create your own out of foam  putty, clay, paper, or other craft supplies. 

2. Select the science you want to share.
Once you have selected a file that you want to work with, go to https://microbewiki.kenyon.edu/index.php/MicrobeWiki and learn about the science.
Think about the particular 'story' - one interesting fact about that microbe that you want to share. 
It's often useful to think about the fact that may be particularly relevant to non-science audiences. 
This can include relevance to applications.

Note: Sometimes you will find a piece of science you want to share first, and then search for a relevant shape file second.
For example, you want to share something about how Bacillus species help make insecticides. 
You might not be able to find a Bacillus shape file, but you may be able to find a "bacterial rod" file that will work.
Another example is that you might want to share how the bacteria Acetobacter makes cellulose. 
You might want to see if you can find a shape file that is of the molecule "cellulose."

3. Create your story. 
Write out your story so that it can be stated in a few sentences if someone mentions to you that they like your hat. Use this framework.
"Thank you! This hat actually features a 3D printed model of _______. 
This is the microbe that does ________. 
<A sentence about why this relates to us.>"

Here are some examples.
"Thank you! This hat actually features a 3D printed model of a yeast cell. 
This is the microbe that helps us bake bread.
Yeast helps dough rise, but cam also impact bread texture, nutrients, and flavor." 

"Thank you! This hat actually features a 3D printed model of a yeast cell. 
This is the microbe that helps us bake bread.
But beyond bread, yeast help us make chocolate, coffee, beer, and wine." 

"Thank you! This hat actually features a 3D printed model of a bacterial colony. 
This is the microbe that produces the antibiotic Neosporin for us.
Most of our commercial antibiotics were discovered from soil bacterial like this one." 

"Thank you! This hat actually features a 3D printed model of a bacterial colony. 
This is the microbe that produces enzymes--molecules--in detergents that let us wash clothing at colder temperatures.
By washing at colder temperatures, we can save up to 50% of the energy in each load of laundry." 

4. Create your hat.
Add in feathers, glitter, sequins, ribbon, or whatever you want to make your hat look great to you.
The less "sciencey" you can make it the better. It's often most effective when people don't know it has anything to do with science!
Check out fashion magazines, or google images of kentucky derby or fashion hats to get ideas. 

5. Wear your hat.
Wear your hat in public spaces - be it your campus, your home, or while traveling. 
Whenever anyone comments on your hat, share your story and start having discussions about science!

Going further...
1. Don't stop with hats. What other fashion/accessories/sport equipment can you decorate to start having microbial conversations?
2. Record observations about what questions you frequently get asked when you tell the story of your hat. 
Record your results and share them with your peers.
3. Record before and after attitudes and understandings of your audience. Did the microbe hat help you share information?
Did it help the audience learn more?
4. Now that you see how important the microbewiki resource is, think about contributing to it.
5. Share your hat--and the science on it--with the world! Post on social media, etc.

Thanks for doing your part to share the wonders of the microbial world!

Extra Tips!
Many public libraries have 3D printers you can use to help print these files.
Think about using a filament that is better for the environment than others.
Be creative! Make your hat something you are comfortable wearing and talking about.

